How to write efficient python code (#2474)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: content/articles/how-to-write-efficient-python-code/index.md

---
layout: engineering-education
status: draft
published: false
url: /how-to-write-efficient-python-code/
title: How to write efficient Python code
description: Learn how to write efficiently as a python developer.
author: samuel-torimiro
date: 2021-05-06T00:00:00-09:00
topics: [Python]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
images:
  - url: /engineering-education/how-to-write-efficient-python-code/hero.jpg
    alt: Python example image
---
As a beginner programmer, writing efficient python code is not the main goal but rather to learn the basic syntax, the flow of the language and how to think like a programmer. But things get interesting when you are trying to advance to an intermediate level developer and really become a true nerd, no pun intended.

> Writing efficient python code is one of the ways a beginner programmer can advance to become an intermediate programmer and really appreciate code readability coupled with the productivity of a developer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Writing efficient python code is one of the ways a beginner programmer can advance to become an intermediate programmer and appreciate code readability coupled with the productivity of a developer.
```

<!--more-->
This tutorial is focused on teaching you how to write efficient python code. By the end of this tutorial, you will be equipped with the tools needed to improve your productivity as a developer. Tools we would be using include `list comprehension`, `lambda`, etc.

### Prerequisites

> To follow along with this tutorial a basic understanding of python is required as well a python interpreter should be installed on your local environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To follow along with this tutorial, a basic understanding of python is required. A python interpreter should be installed in your local environment.
```

Reviewer: Please provide a link to the Python Downloads page.

### List Comprehension
List comprehension allows us to generate our list with data using one line of code. This is our first journey in writing efficient python code.

Let's take a look at the traditional way of generating our list with data.

```py
nums = []
for x in range(10):
  nums.append(x)

print(nums)
```
It took us about 3 lines of code. Let's try to be more efficient using `list comprehension`.

```py
nums = [x for x in range(10)]

print(nums)
```
Voilà, just one line of code to achieve the earlier result. It is way quicker to write once you understand the syntax and flow of `list comprehension`.

Let's take a look at two more complex examples.

```py
nums = [x for x in range(20) if x % 2 != 0]

print(nums)

nums = ['True' if x % 2 == 0 else 'False' for x in range(20)]

print(nums)
```

With these two examples above, we added the ability to use `if/else` statement in our list comprehension. It should be noted that `elif` statement can't be used within list comprehension.

In this section, we learnt about using list comprehension to generate our list for us with data with ease. In the next section, we will be taking a look at `lambda` functions.

### Lambda Functions

> `Lambda` function is basically a one-line function in python. They are also anonymous function because they are nameless.

Reviewer: Can you come up with an accurate definition for Lambda functions.

Let's take a look at an example of a regular function in Python.

```py
def even_or_odd(n):
  if n % 2 == 0:
    return "Even"
  else:
    return "Odd"

print(even_or_odd(10))
```

> This took us about five lines of code to write, with `lambdas` I'm happy to say it will only take us one line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This took us about five lines of code to write, with `lambdas` I'm happy to say that it'll only take only one line.
```

```py
print((lambda n: "Even" if n % 2 == 0 else "Odd")(9))
```
We can also store them inside variables.

```py
even_or_odd = lambda n: "Even" if n % 2 == 0 else "Odd"
even_or_odd(8)
```

> If we store them inside a variable, we don't need to wrap parenthesis around the `lambda` function and the argument. The variable as well serves as the function call.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we store them inside a variable, we don't need to wrap parenthesis around the `lambda` function and the argument. The variable serves as the identifier to call the function.
```

> In this section, we looked at `lambdas` a very quick way of writing function. They don't work for very complex functions. In the next section, we will take a look at three very useful functions namely `map`, `filter`, `reduce`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, we looked at `lambdas` a very quick way of writing function. They don't work well for very complex functions. In the next section, we'll take a look at three very useful functions namely `map`, `filter`, and `reduce`.
```

### Map, Filter and Reduce

> When working with a list filled with data, `map`, `filter` and `reduce` gives us the ability to perform common list manipulation task that will have taken us a few lines of code to implement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When working with a list filled with data, `map`, `filter`, and `reduce` gives us the ability to perform common list manipulation tasks that'll take a few lines of code to implement.
```

> The first on the list is `map`, with map function we can modify our list however we want. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first on the list is `map`. With the `map` function we can modify our list however we want. 
```

Let's take a look at an example.

```py
# Example of a map function
nums = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]

squared_nums = list(map(lambda x: x * x, nums))

print(squared_nums)
```

The map function takes two arguments, the function that would modify the data, and the data itself. In our example, we used the lambda function but we could as well have used it without lambdas.

> Map function coupled with lambda function allows us to modify our list with just one line of code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `map` function coupled with lambda function allows us to modify our list with just one line of code.
```

Note that we use the `list` function to convert map object back to a list.

> The second is `filter`, the filter function is used to you guessed it, filter out unwanted data from our list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second is `filter`, the filter function is used to filter out unwanted data from our list.
```

The *result* would be the final list containing our data, the *transform* is the value of each data in our list, it keeps on changing as the value of the iterator changes. The *iteration* is a loop that helps populate our list with the required amount of data. Finally, the *filter* (optional) is used to filter out the data that we don't want.

Before we take a look at an example of list comprehension, let's take a look at the traditional way of generating a list with data so we can compare the two ways.

```python
nums = []
for x in range(10):
    nums.append(x)

print(nums)
```

**Output:**

```bash
[0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]
```
It took us about 3 lines of code. Let's try to be more efficient using `list comprehension`.

```python
nums = [x for x in range(10)]

print(nums)
```

**Output:**

```bash
[0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]
```

Voilà, just one line of code to achieve the earlier result. It is way quicker to write once you understand the syntax and flow of `list comprehension`.

Let's take a look at two more complex examples by adding *filters*.

```python
nums = [x for x in range(20) if x % 2 != 0]

print(nums)
```

**Output:**

```bash

> [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]

Reviewer 2: How did you do the technical review? @zolomohan 
The output is wrong. It should be:

```bash
[1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19]
```

[1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19]

Reviewer: Oh shoot. Must have missed it. I ran all the snippets in an online compiler. I'll fix it and double check the other outputs too. Sorry for the inconvenience.

Reviewer 2: Don't worry about it, I already fixed them. Will commit it soon

Reviewer: thank you so much.

In this section, we learned about using list comprehension to generate our list for us with data with ease. In the next section, we will be taking a look at `lambda` functions.

### Lambda Functions
`Lambda` functions is a technique in Python of written our functions on a single line. They are regarded as anonymous (nameless) functions. They are also not suited for complex functions. Just like with list comprehension, they make our code small and concise.

Let's take a look at the syntax;

*lambda* arguments: expression

The value at the left is referred to as the arguments, while the values at the right are the expression. Let's break the syntax further.

*lambda* arguments: value_to_return *if* condition *else* value_to_return

Before we take a look at an example of lambda functions, let's take a look at an example of a regular function in Python so we can compare the two ways.

```python
def even_or_odd(n):
    if n % 2 == 0:
        return "Even"
    else:
        return "Odd"

print(even_or_odd(10))
```

**Output:**

```bash

> Odd

Reviewer 2: Also, the output here is wrong, it should be Even. @zolomohan

Reviewer 2: Don't worry about it! I believe you are a good peer reviewer and anyone can make a mistake. @zolomohan
